
Author: Joanna
CPSC 444: User Interface Design
2006-07/Term 2: Final Exam Review Questions
Note: these review questions concentrate mostly on material from lectures, but the
exam will cover tutorials and the labs (project) as well.
Question 1: Experimental Design and Statistical Analysis
Recall that Hick’s Law defines a log-linear decision-time relationship for choosing one
item from n equally-likely alternatives. Suppose you wanted to verify Hick’s Law as part
of developing general design guidelines for a menu-based GUI. Design a simple user
study task that verifies Hick’s Law and explain what kind of statistical analyses would be
appropriate for this study. You do not have to provide a description of your subject pool
and you do not need to provide a complete description of your equipment/apparatus.

Question 2: Experimental Design and Statistical Analysis
Buggy Inc. is a company that specializes in the development of visual debugging
interfaces for large, complex software engineering projects. They have recently
developed a software package that uses an innovative scheme to highlight syntax errors
in code. Because their package has the exact same functionality as a software package
sold by their competitors, they want to run a controlled user study to see which of the two
software packages is more usable (hoping they can say their package is more usable than
their competitor’s). They hope that their interface will be better for both novices and
experts, but suspect it may only be the case for novices. They are most interested in
comparing how rapidly users can find syntactic errors in their code and how quickly their
interface allows them to make corrections.
(a) What are the independent and dependent variables for this user study? In terms of a
statistical test, what is the relationship between the independent and dependent
variables?
(b) Describe the most powerful statistical test to compare how quickly users can find
syntactic errors in their code and whether there is an impact of expertise? What are
the possible outcomes from the statistical test? Specify one assumption that must be
satisfied before you can use the test.
(c) When designing a user study such as this one, what are two possible threats to
validity that need to be considered? Explain how they threaten validity.
(d) What is a nuisance variable? Give one example of a nuisance variable in this kind of
situation and explain how you might accommodate for it.

1

Question 3: Field methods
The following questions refer to the CHI 2002 paper: “An Evaluation of a Multiple
Interface Design Solution for Bloated Software” by McGrenere et al.
(a) What commercial software application was used in the research?
(b) Briefly describe the setting where the experimental study took place.
(c) There were two independent variables in the experimental study. What were they and
what were their specific values?
(d) Name two limitations to this study as it was conducted and briefly provide alternative
study designs that would address each of the limitations.

Question 4: Video
(a) In 444 you used video to capture data in a lab experiment of a hi-fi prototype.
Video can also be a powerful tool in the early stages of design, as demonstrated
by Wendy Mackay. Briefly explain what those early stages are, how video is used
in those design stages, and why it is a useful tool.
(b) Name and explain one primary drawback to using video in these early stages of
design.

Question 5: History of HCI
List 5 innovations by Doug Englebart as described and shown in Alan Kay’s lecture and
explain to what extent HCI has evolved today with respect to those innovations.

Question 6: Cognitive Engineering
One heuristic in Heuristic Evaluation is to “Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover
from errors.” Which of the two “gulfs” identified in Norman’s 7-stage model of humancomputer interaction does that heuristic best attempt to address. Explain your answer.

Question 7: HCI research and industry
You have been asked to design a technology supported small workroom to support faceto-face collaboration for small to medium size groups (2-6 people). Identify and briefly
explain five factors that you need to consider in terms of how to outfit that room with
displays.

2

