
CPSC 121 Sample Midterm
October 2008
[12] 1. After the midterm, several friends are thinking about going to see a movie, either Death at
a Funeral or Rendition. Let
a
e
p
v
w
d
r

=
=
=
=
=
=
=

Alice wants to go to the movie
Ebert wants to go to the movie
Peter wants to go to the movie
Volkov wants to go to the movie
Wolfgang wants to go to the movie
The movie is Death at a Funeral
The movie is Rendition

The table below contains various English sentences, predicates, and logic circuits. Each
sentence, truth value of an expression, or output of a circuit describes a set of conditions
where Wolfgang will go to a movie (that is, “w”). Identify those that are equivalent to each
other. You will find 3 groups of two table entries that are equivalent, and two entries that are
equivalent to no other entry. You should write your answer in the form “A ≡ B, C ≡ D,
E ≡ F , G and H are unpaired.”
Write your answers below (continue at the top of the next page). You should give a short
justification (one or two sentences) for each pairing. Do not spend more than 15 minutes
on this question, unless you have already completed the rest of the examination.

A.

a
p
e
v

w

B.

a
p
e
v

w

C.

Wolfgang will go to a movie if and
only if at least three of the other four
people want to go to it.

D.

Wolfgang will go if and only if that
makes the number of people in the
group even.

E.

Wolfgang will only go to Death at
a Funeral with Peter or to Rendition
with Alice.

F.

(d ∧ p) ∨ (r ∧ a)

G.

(p ∧ ∼ a) ∨ (v ∧ ∼ e)

H.

((a ∨ e) ∧ (v ∨ p)) ∨
((a ∨ v) ∧ (e ∨ p))

page 2

Solution :
• E matches F: this is a direct English translation.
• B matches G: the circuit outputs the value ∼ (∼ (∼ a ∧ p)∧ ∼ (∼ e ∧ v)). By
DeMorgan’s law and the double negation law, this is the same as (∼ a ∧ p) ∨ (∼ e ∧ v),
which is the same as the proposition in G by the commutative law.
• A matches D: the only way for the output of the circuit to be true is if either 1 or 3 of
the four inputs is/are true. Thus Wolfgang will go if either 1 or 3 other people go, i.e.
if (and only if) this makes the total number of people even.
• C and H are unmatched.
[12] 2. Because he was busy grading a Computer Science midterm, Steve was unable to attend the
department’s Halloween party. He managed to obtain some information by talking to people
who attended the party. Unfortunately, their memories were rather imprecise, and so all that
Steve learned was the following:
• Either Ujjal or Wolfgang came dressed as a werewolf.
• Either Ronald or Stéphanie was dressed as a dragon.
• Priscilla and Quirinius both left early.
• If Ujjal came dressed as a werewolf, then Ronald came dressed as a dragon and Tom
was dressed as a giant snake.
• If Ronald was dressed as a dragon, then Quirinius did not leave early.
• Tom was disguised as a giant snake if and only if neither Ronald nor Stéphanie was
disguised as a dragon.
[4] (a) Rewrite each of these statements using propositional logic. Make sure to define the
propositions you are using (that is, state something like: “u: Ujjal came dressed as
a werewolf” before writing the proposition ∼u).
Solution : We will use the following propositions (I have ordered them alphabetically, but there was no need for you to do that):
p
q
r
s
t
u
w

:
:
:
:
:
:
:

Priscilla left early
Quirinius left early
Ronald was dressed as a dragon
Stéphanie was dressed as a dragon
Tom was dressed as a giant snake
Ujjal was dressed as a werewolf
Wolfgang was dressed as a werewolf

page 3
Given that, the statements can be rewritten as:
1. u ∨ w
2. r ∨ s
3. p ∧ q
4. u → (r ∧ t)
5. r →∼ q
6. t ↔∼ r∧ ∼ s
[8] (b) Using your answer from part (a), known logical equivalences, and the rules of inference, prove that Wolfgang was dressed as a werewolf.
Solution :
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Here is one possible proof:
q
simplification from 3
∼∼ q
by the double-negation law
∼r
modus tollens from 5 and 8
∼ (r ∧ t) using the definition of ∧ from 9
∼u
modus tollens from 4 and 10
w
disjunctive syllogism from 1 and 11

[6] 3. Let G be the set of all games of the Vancouver Canucks in the 2008/2009 Hockey season,
and F be the set of all hockey fans. Furthermore, suppose we have a predicates Saw(x,y)
that is true if fan x saw game y (in person, or on TV). You may assume that “first game”
and “last game” are element of G that correspond to the first and last games of the Canucks’
season respectively.
[3] (a) Translate into English the proposition
∃g ∈ G ∀x ∈ F Saw(x, g) ∨ Saw(x, last game)
Solution : Here are a couple of possible answers:
There is a specific game played by the Vancouver Canucks with the property that every hockey fan saw either that game or the Canuck’s last game
of the season, or both.
and
There is a game played with the Vancouver Canucks with the property that
everybody who did not see that game saw the Canuck’s last game of the
season.
[3] (b) Write the statement “Every fan who saw at least two different games saw the first
game of the season” using predicate logic.
Solution : Here is one possible solution:
∀x ∈ F

(∃g1 ∈ G ∃g2 ∈ G Saw(x, g1) ∧ Saw(x, g2) ∧ g1 6= g2) →
Saw(x, first game)

page 4
Note that the parentheses on the left-hand side of the implication were required
(removing them changes the meaning of the proposition).
[11] 4. Number representation
[3] a. Explain briefly why almost all modern computers represent integers using two’s complement representation, instead of setting aside one bit to use as a sign (with 0 representing +, and 1 representing −).
Solution : The main reason is that using two’s complement notation allows us to
implement addition and subtraction of both unsigned and signed integers using one
circuit. If we instead used a separate sign bit, then addition and subtraction (or even
addition of numbers with different signs) would need to use completely different
circuits.
[8] b. Design a circuit that takes as input a four-bit unsigned integer a3 a2 a1 a0 , and outputs
1 if that integer is divisible by 3. Show your work: we need to understand how you
designed your circuit and why you believe it computes the correct answer. Hint: do
not try to implement binary division. Instead, use the fact that there are only a few
values for which your circuit should output 1.
A working circuit will be worth at least 6 marks out of 8. To get full marks, your
circuit will also need to be reasonably elegant (a solution with only 7 gates exists).
Solution : The only four-bit unsigned integers that are divisible by 3 are 0 (0000),
3 (0011), 6 (0110), 9 (1001), 12 (1100) and 15 (1111). One way to design the circuit
would be to test for each possibility independently, and then combine them using an
OR gate:

a3

on
off

a2

on
off

a1

on
off

a0

on
off

page 5
A more elegant solution would be to observe that the bit patterns listed above have
at least one of the following two properties (and are the only bit patterns that satisfy
one or both of them):
• The first two bits are the same, and so are the last two bits.
• The middle two bits are the same, and so are the “outside” two bits.
This leads us to the following more elegant solution:
a3

on
off

a2

on
off

a1

on
off

a0

on
off

[11] 5. Consider the following theorem:
No matter what positive real number c we pick, there will be some positive integer n for which 3n > c2n .
[3] a. Translate this theorem into predicate logic (that is, using predicates and quantifiers).
Solution : ∀c ∈ R+ ∃n ∈ Z+ 3n > c2n .
[8] b. Prove the theorem using a direct proof.
Solution : This theorem contains a universal quantifier, with an existential quantifier
nested inside it. Hence, we start by considering an unspecified positive real number
c. Now, we need to show how to choose a value of n for which 3n > c2n .
Scratch work (not part of the answer as such, but you might have scribbled that on
the back of the page): we want 3n > c2n . That will be satisfied as long as 3n /2n > c.
That is, as long as (3/2)n > c, which means n > log3/2 c.
Back to the proof: pick any integer n larger than log3/2 c (for instance, 1 + ⌈log3/2 c⌉
would do). Then (3/2)n > c, which means that 3n > c2n .
[8] 6. Using an indirect proof, prove that the equation ax + b = c (where a, b, c are real numbers,
and a 6= 0) has only a single solution for x.
Solution : We use a proof by contradiction. Suppose to the contrary that there are values of
a, b and c, with a 6= 0, for which the equation ax + b = c has at least two different solutions
x1 and x2 for x. Then ax1 + b = c and ax2 + b = c. This means that ax1 + b = ax2 + b,
and hence that ax1 = ax2 . Since a 6= 0, it therefore follows that x1 = x2 . However this
contradicts our assumption that x1 6= x2 . This means that the original theorem must be true.

