https://web.archive.org/web/2222/http://www.ugrad.cs.ubc.ca/~cs344/current-term/res/oldexams/cpsc344-2005w1-midterm-sample-soln.pdf
Author: maclean
Name:

Student ID Number:

Signature:

CPSC 344 2005-06 Term 1 Midterm Exam
50 minutes
SOLUTIONS + comments
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
K. MacLean
Exam Instructions (read carefully):
1. Immediately sign the first page of the exam with
your signature in the space provided on the upper
left.

Question

Points

2. Print your Name and Student ID at the top of each
page in the booklet before you start working.

1

9

2

8

3

9

4

12

5

12

Total

50

3. Continue reading these instructions, but do not open
the exam booklet until you are told to do so by a
proctor.
4. Cheating is an academic offense. Your signature on
the exam indicates that you understand and agree to
the University’s policies regarding cheating on
exams.
5. The exam is closed book. There are no aids
permitted (this includes calculators).
6. Interpret the exam questions as written. When in
doubt, take a strict, literal interpretation of the
question.

Received

7. You have 50 minutes in which to work (~1
min/mark). Budget your time wisely.
8. No one will be permitted to leave the exam room
during the last ten minutes of the exam.

CPSC 344 2005-06/T1

1 of 10

Midterm Exam (50 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

Question #1 [9 points total]: Matching Exercise
The terms listed immediately below are possible answers for the definitions listed lower on the page. Use
the number corresponding to a term below as an answer in the space provided next to the following
questions if you think it is the best match for that concept or definition. Each term is used either once or
not at all.
(1) Focus group

(13) Runnable model

(2) Stakeholder constraint

(14) Cognitive walkthrough

(3) Design model

(15) Technology constraint

(4) Origami

(16) The myth of human error

(5) Heuristic evaluation

(17) Psychopathology

(6) Cast of characters

(18) Situation of concern

(7) Ethnography

(19) Iterative design

(8) Unstructured interview

(20) Hidden video recording

(9) Task example

(21) Causal relation

(10) Participatory design

(22) Transfer effect

(11) Gulf of evaluation

(23) Paper prototype

(12) Popcorn

(24) Active listening

For each statement below, write the number of the term from the list above that best fits into the missing
space. [1 pt each]
8

(a) Example of an ‘intrusive’ tool for observing a single user (in sense of user’s immediate
perception)

23

(b) Illustrates the logical flow of an interface design

7

(c) The general practice of observing users and tasks in their own context

6

(d) A method in which designers “identify with” the user

15

(e) One example is when a company owns intellectual property relating to the product being
designed

22

(f) The designer can exploit this to promote an accessible mental model for an interface

1

(g) Evaluation technique especially suited for identifying ‘proto-users’

11

(h) An impediment to transparent goal-oriented action

12

(i) A metaphor that describes a particular concept generation technique

CPSC 344 2005-06/T1

2 of 10

Midterm Exam (50 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

Question #2 [8 points total]: True/False
For each of the 4 statements below, indicate whether the statement is true or false by circling either True
or False. Briefly explain your answer in one or two sentences. [1 pt / correct answer, 1 pt/explanation]
(a) Statement: Discount methods are a means of ‘simulating’ user feedback, and as such may have a
lower cost.
True

False

Explain:
True. They’re ‘discount’ because they’re cheap. Ideally, direct user feedback would be required; but this
is not always possible. Also, the analytical qualities of the discount methods are useful in their own right.

(b) Statement: The CS344/444/543/544 ethics protocol submitted to the Behavioral Research Ethics
Board at UBC allows 344 students to request participation from anyone who is clearly a stakeholder
of the system being evaluated in the students’ course project.
True

False

Explain:

False. 444/544 students may only recruit their friends, family members, classmates and acquaintances
through word of mouth.

(c) Statement: Slips are errors that are made because the user has the incorrect mental model.
True

False

Explain:

False. Slips are unconscious errors. Mistakes are errors of intention that could be caused by an incorrect
mental model.

(d) Statement: Questionnaires usually have a lowest cost of actual administration and analysis (per-study)
of any evaluation technique.
True

False

Explain:

True. The cost of administering and analyzing a questionnaire is pretty low (especially with online
methods); and it is relatively easy to automate. On the other hand, designing a questionnaire well can be
time-consuming, and collecting contact data (e.g. email addresses or mail addresses) may be problematic
or expensive. Respondence rates can be low.

CPSC 344 2005-06 T1

3 of 10

Midterm Exam (50 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

Question #3 [9 points total]: Discussion Questions
generally very well done
(a) Describe how task examples relate to a design prototype. [3 pts]
Task examples explain what a user does or wants to do, but not how s/he does it. They can be used to test
a design prototype (e.g. by driving a heuristic evaluation) but they themselves are design-independent.

(b) Describe “stimulus fusion”, and explain its relation to perceptual causality. [3 pts]

Stimuli which occur in the same ‘perceptual processing cycle’ can fuse and appear to belong to the same
percept. If stimuli appear to cause one another, they can also fuse without having to occur at the same
time.

(c) Compare and contrast ethnography and observation. [3 pts]

Observation = a broad class of observation techniques.
Ethnography = a specific but sophisticated type of observation, usually extending over a period of time
and with the objective of building up a body of general knowledge about a user group.

CPSC 344 2005-06 T1

4 of 10

Midterm Exam (50 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

Questions 4-5 are based on the following design brief.
“DigiCookbook”: a Cook’s Assistant for the Electronic Kitchen
Digital Kitchens Inc. has finished most of the development of a product called DigiCookbook, a recipe
management application that lets users:
• enter or download recipes
• search on topics such as cuisine or ingredient
• compile weekly menus
• create grocery shopping lists.
It will operate on a desktop PC; in a networked home, it will also be usable in the kitchen with simplified
I/O devices, replacing a paper recipe book. DigiCookbook will use two sources of recipe data: a locally
stored and cross-indexed database of downloaded or manually entered recipes, both capable of being
annotated; and/or a large online database of recipes, available at www.digiCookbook.com.
DigiCookbook is targeted at tech-savvy families with children living in the home.
You’ve been assigned by your employer (a UI design consulting firm) to help DigiCookbook’s production
team to refine certain aspects of their upcoming product release.
At present, DigiCookbook exists as (a) a functioning but aesthetically unexciting engineering prototype
that simulates access to local and online recipe databases, and (b) a series of non-functioning conceptual
mockups that indicate how the graphical user interface might look. The latter takes the approach of two
use modes of the interface, with graded complexity:
(1) desk: for I/O intensive tasks such as data entry, search, menu management, etc; user sits at a
computer and uses a keyboard and mouse
(2) kitchen: for simple recipe display in the kitchen while cooking; assumes ‘thin client’ connection
to the desk computer, with a low-res touch screen but no separate keyboard or storage. Individual
recipes, or small sets of them, can be ‘sent’ to the kitchen display from the desk terminal.

CPSC 344 2005-06 T1

5 of 10

Midterm Exam (50 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

Question #4 [12 points total]: Interaction Models
(a) Which of these mental model types do you think a user would find most useful in the use of the
‘kitchen’ mode for DigiCookbook – and a designer should therefore choose to reinforce? Circle one,
justify your response in 1-2 sentences, and give one example of a design element that would reinforce
the type of model you’ve chosen. [5 pts] – one pt for free (circling one of the choices)
state-transition model

object-action model

mapping model

metaphorical model

Justify:
There is more than one reasonable approach to designing this interaction, so the key to this question is in
your justification. For example,
- An object action model is probably the most obvious, since the primary goal of the interaction is to
effect changes on specific data objects (individual recipes, the recipe database, menus, grocery lists, etc).
- A metaphorical model may be a popular choice, since the metaphor of a traditional recipe book or file
might drive the design. It will almost certainly run into limits which might make it less useful, though,
since this system supposedly will do much more.

Example of a design element that reinforces the model in a useful way:
Object-action model: visually representing the objects which the user can’t see is a good way to
reinforce this model. The representation must be in a useful way to get full credit.

(b) Identify one challenge the UI designer will face in creating a good mental model for this product
(more than one good answer exists). [3 pts]
Many possibilities. 2 examples:
1. Exhibiting the functionality available in limited kitchen mode
2. Organization of data (e.g. what can be searched on).
3. Making the kitchen display update step transparent, when the user making the update from the desk
terminal cannot see the kitchen display for confirmation of correct actions
Points varied based on quality of answer and how well it related to the mental model.

(c) Identify two reasons why users might prefer the ‘old-fashioned’ system consisting of a mess of bound
cookbooks and paper recipe cards, over this new electronic approach. [4 pts]
Many possibilities. Credit for all good ones, e.g.:
1. Physical annotation properties of archival paper
2. Data entry is a pain
3. Paper is easier to read than a monitor, and perhaps more kitchen-friendly; wasteful to print out
recipes each time used
CPSC 344 2005-06 T1

6 of 10

Midterm Exam (50 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

4. Many recipe books are beautiful and/or embody emotional attachments
Points varied based on quality of answer and how well it related to the mental model.

CPSC 344 2005-06 T1

7 of 10

Midterm Exam (50 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

Question #5 [12 points total]: Involving Users
You need to get a general idea of the problems with the current design for DigiCookbook, and to
understand the basic constraints on the next iteration. Who should you talk to?
In the box below, list four primary stakeholders who might have distinct needs, concerns and influence
in this design process, taking care to identify their key attributes and abilities. The terms “family member”
or “the company that manufactures the product” are too general.
Then, for each stakeholder group identified, list one activity that you could do as the designer, which
would help you better understand how to proceed with your task. Choose the activity appropriately for the
particular stakeholder and keep in mind the current prototyping status of DigiCookbook. The terms
“observation” or “interview” are too general as answers; you must also include some sense of what you
hope to gain. Do not list the same activity under more than one stakeholder (i.e. list 4 different activities).
Finally, clearly justify the choice of activity for that stakeholder.
There is more than one acceptable answer for this question.
Credit given for all reasonable answers: 4 pts / stakeholder (16 pts total), 2 pt for each well-defined,
appropriate stakeholder and 2 pts for each plausibly justified activity. Examples of possible answers are
listed below. Points were subtracted for answers that were unhelpfully vague (e.g. “family members”:
there are many possible types of family members, with different roles to play in this product and different
abilities / motivations for making it function smoothly. )
Stakeholder

Activity

Justification

(a) technically
sophisticated family
members who participate
in the family cooking
and/or menu planning

Think-aloud observation
while using engineering
prototype

This group is probably best suited as a
source of specific usability feedback, and
should be able to ‘see past’ an ‘ugly’
engineering prototype

(b) technically
unsophisticated family
members who cook

Paper (not online)
questionnaires

Don’t show them the engineering prototype,
since they might find it overwhelming or
difficult to comprehend.

Focus group, combined
with demo of mediumfidelity conceptual
prototypes

Since not familiar w/ technology, the peerreinforced atmosphere of a focus group
might be reassuring and generate more
imaginative responses. They probably will
need some aid to understand system.
Questionnaires might be good way to get at
willingness-to-pay, etc.

(c) system engineers

Semi-structured interview

Ask about constraints on system design.
Structured part: opinions on changes you’re
envisioning suggesting.
Unstructured part: ‘What else should I

CPSC 344 2005-06 T1

8 of 10

Midterm Exam (50 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

know about’?
(d) company’s VP of
marketing

CPSC 344 2005-06 T1

Unstructured interview

9 of 10

‘Tell me about the demographic you’re
targeting for this product.”

Midterm Exam (50 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

Extra page to continue work.

CPSC 344 2005-06 T1

10 of 10

Midterm Exam (50 minutes)

