https://web.archive.org/web/2222/http://www.ugrad.cs.ubc.ca/~cs344/current-term/res/oldexams/cpsc344-2007w1-midterm-sample-soln.pdf
Author: wolf
ame: Sample Sol’n (yours may differ!)

Student ID umber:

Signature:

CPSC 344, 2007-08 Winter Term 1 Midterm Exam
90 minutes

Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
S. Wolfman
Exam Instructions (read carefully):
1. Sign this page in the space provided to indicate your
agreement with these instructions. (You must sign to
write the exam.)
2. Continue reading these instructions, but do not open
the exam booklet until you are told to do so by a
proctor.
3. Print your initials at the top of each page in the
booklet before you start working.
4. Cheating is an academic offense. Your signature on
the exam indicates that you understand and agree to
the University’s policies regarding cheating on
exams.
5. The exam is closed book. There are no aids
permitted (this includes calculators).
6. Interpret the exam questions as written. When in
doubt, take a strict, literal interpretation of the
question and write down any necessary assumptions.
7. You have 90 minutes in which to work (~1
min/mark). Budget your time wisely.
8. When continuing your work on a blank page at the
end, please indicate this clearly at the initial location
and on the blank page.
9. No one will be permitted to leave the exam room
during the last ten minutes of the exam.

Question

Points

1

18

2

12

3

15

4

14

5

6

6

8

7

7

Total

80

Received

THIS PAGE ITETIOALLY LEFT BLAK

CPSC 344 2007/08 W1

2 of 14

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Initials: _________________

Question #1 [18 points total]: True/False
For each of the 6 statements below, indicate whether the statement is true or false by circling either True
or False. Briefly explain your T/F response in one or two sentences, and illustrate with an example where
appropriate. [3 pts each, 1 pt for T/F + 2 pts for explanation]

(a) Statement: Because they emphasize natural mappings, mapping models are the most appropriate type
of mental model to aim for in interface design.
True

False

Explain:
Mapping models are one of a variety of models, any of which (or any combination of which) may
be appropriate depending on the nature of the design scenario and design. For example, a file
system lends itself naturally to an object-action model, since users conceive of themselves as
managing a collection of individual objects. File systems have also traditionally used metaphors
to strengthen their models.

(b) Statement: When designing a graphical user interface, the primary purpose of a low-fidelity paper
prototype is typically to capture and assess the interface’s appearance.
True

False

Explain:
Low-fidelity prototyping generally does not capture either the final appearance or functionality of
a system. Rather, the intention of a lo-fi prototype is generally to communicate design ideas or
evaluate workflow and gross design ideas. Indeed, one of the strengths of a paper prototype is
that its rough appearance telegraphs the unpolished state of the design, inviting comment from
users.
(c) Statement: Seven is a reasonable number of items to expect interface users to hold in short-term
memory because the average number of chunks people can hold in short-term memory is 7.
True

False

Explain:

It is true that people can generally hold about 7 ± 2 “chunks” in memory at a time.
However, that means that a substantial fraction of our user population (perhaps roughly
half) will at any given time find it difficult to hold 7 chunks in short-term memory, which
is not really acceptable for design purposes. It might be more appropriate to expect users
to hold 5 chunks in short-term memory to accommodate the vast majority of users.

CPSC 344 2007/08 W1

3 of 14

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

(d) Statement: The CS344/444/543/544 ethics protocol submitted to the Behavioral Research Ethics
Board at UBC allows 344 students to use people they know personally as subjects.
True

False

Explain:
In fact, the ethics protocol not only allows but requires students to use acquaintances (such as
people they personally know).

(e) Statement: A password entry system that shows a warning when CAPS LOCK appears to be
unintentionally active is an example of a “visible constraint”.
True

False

Explain:
This interaction illustrates feedback, not a visible constraint. A constraint might somehow
prevent the user from entering an unintentionally capitalized word (though it’s not clear how that
would be done).

(f) Statement: Contextual inquiry is generally a better choice over plain ethnography when gathering
information for UI design because contextual inquiry is structured specifically with the needs of UI
design in mind.
True

False

Explain:

One way to think about contextual inquiry is as a variation of ethnography structured specifically
around a design problem in a workplace context. Various features of CI (such as explicit design
discussions and a focus on a design question) support this intent.

CPSC 344 2007/08 W1

4 of 14

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Initials: _________________

Question #2 [12 points total]: Design Concepts
This question describes four flawed vending machine designs. Assume all vended items cost the same
amount, and that cost is known to the user (so only selection is a stake). Match each of the design
concepts affordance, feedback, mapping, and visibility with the single design that best illustrates a
violation of the concept and explain why the design violates the concept. [3 pts each: 1 for matching term
and 2 for explanation]
(a) The vending machine is a large, glass-fronted case with multiple trays of snack items. Each item has a
label beneath it that lists a letter and number combination like “B7”. Users must insert their payment and
then type the letter and number combination of the item they want on a keypad divided into a set of 10
letter keys and 10 number keys (sufficient to type every possible label in the case).
Design concept violated: Mapping
Explanation:
There is no natural connection between a snack (like Cheetos) and a letter number combination (like
“B7”). So, users must memorize, albeit briefly and in short-term memory, a meaningless mapping to
purchase their snack. Furthermore, users may have difficulty identifying whether a given snack goes with
the number above or below it.
OTE: on none of these questions do we request a design solution! Be careful about proposing a
solution when an explanation is requested; they are not the same thing and not always interchangeable!

(b) The vending machine looks like the one from (a) — a large, glass-fronted case with multiple trays of
snack items — except the items are unlabeled. The glass face of the case doubles as a touch screen.
Users enter appropriate change and then press the glass over the item they want.
Design concept violated: Affordance
Explanation:
Users are not used to touching glass, and nothing about a plain glass-fronted case suggests pressing or
touching. Indeed, fears of dirtying/smudging or even breaking glass mean that the glass case will likely
suppress intent to touch it!

CPSC 344 2007/08 W1

5 of 14

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

(c) The vending machine is a large, opaque case. Below the payment slot on the right is a column of
buttons, each one flanked by an image of the item vended. The user enters payment and then presses the
button next to the image of the item they want. If the user selects an item that is sold out, the machine
returns the user’s change and shows a message saying that the item is out and to please select another.
Design concept violated: Visibility
Explanation:
A crucial element of the system state (availability of an item) is not visible in the system image at the time
when the user needs it.
ote: “visibility” as used here does not necessarily relate to vision. For example, a telephone system can
have good visibility through careful management of the state revealed to users via speech and other
sounds as long as that system image (what the user hears) communicates the key elements and
functionality of the system itself.

(d) The vending machine looks like the one from (c) — a large, opaque case with a column of buttons and
images— except there is also a “SOLD OUT” light next to each button. The light turns on for items that
are out. Users enter their payment and press the button of the item they want. If they press the button of
an item that is sold out, the machine simply waits for them to press a different button instead.
Design concept violated: Feedback
Explanation:
Although this machine fixes the visibility problem from the previous section, users may still request items
that are sold out because the overlook or misunderstand the SOLD OUT indicator. If they do, this
machine provides no visible or audio feedback to indicate that a problem occurred. Because it silently
ignores the error, users are apt to repeat their mistake or conclude that the machine is broken.

CPSC 344 2007/08 W1

6 of 14

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Initials: _________________

Question #3 [15 points total]: Discussion Questions
(a) In a few sentences, describe Heuristic Evaluation: what it consists of, and (briefly) its goals, its
limitations, and when in the design process it is most useful. [6 pts]
In HE, a design team provides a prototype of their design to a group of 3-5 usability experts for
review in order to identify classic usability problems according to a set of ~10 design heuristics.
The experts individually review the prototype, noting violations of the heuristics and their severity
and perhaps design recommendations. The individual reviews are then aggregated into a final report.
Because HE requires a prototype (or clear specification), it best used after some initial design work.
Because it does not use real users, it may be best early on when “cheap” feedback is most helpful.
Since HE is focused on criticism, it generally does not lead to new design ideas or directions.
(b) List and justify 3 important characteristics of a good task example or set of task examples. [9 pts]
NOTE: there are many possibilities, here are three. Also, note the requirement to justify!
(1) Characteristic: Good task examples should say what the user does not how they do it.
Justification: such examples are “design neutral” in the sense that they can be used with any
design (any process for accomplishing the task). This is crucial during the early stages when task
examples are developed to avoid prematurely committing designers to a particular design.
(2) Characteristic: Good task examples describe a complete task that accomplishes an important goal
for the user.
Justification: task examples that represent only a part of a task may clearly illustrate a portion of a
design from the designer’s perspective (i.e., “fit” within some component of the design structure),
but they are divorced from users’ intentions. A complete task example aimed at a user’s goal
forces the designer to consider users’ needs and to recognize the entire design problem.

(3) Characteristic: Good task example sets cover a range of tasks including common, critical, and rare
but interesting or important cases.
Justification: as in (2), designers need a wholistic view of the design scenario to create a design
that addresses users’ needs. Creating a broad task set encourages this wholistic view of the
scenario early on. Later, designers might justifiably divide these task examples into those that
they will focus on and those that they will de-emphasize or even not support.

CPSC 344 2007/08 W1

7 of 14

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Questions 4-6 are based on the following design brief.
You’ve been hired by a company that produces bicycling products to design a “ride muse”: a device that
record ideas cyclists have during their rides. The device is inspired by the company CEO’s habit of
thinking deep thoughts during his rides and frustration with having no easy way to jot these ideas down.
On his own time, the CEO put together four physical form-factor prototypes of “ride muses” based on
different recording formats (voice-activated audio, lever-activated audio using an extra “gear” lever,
always-on audio with continuous compression for silent stretches, and one-handed “chorded” handlebar
keypad input). After trial runs with each one, he much preferred the voice-activated audio system and has
decided to go with it.
The company expects to design, market, and sell the product itself, but the actual production will be
handled by another firm with the necessary expertise (e.g., a firm that produces dictation devices).
Successful marketing in the cycling world requires word-of-mouth from influential users; fortunately, the
company has a well-established partnership with a local bike club and a national bicycling magazine.
Your team is about to begin. While you are excited about the product idea, you are also concerned about
the state of the design process as it was “handed” to you.

Question #4 [14 points total]: Pre-Design Activities
(a) The company CEO has already made some key errors in user-centred design, but it’s touchy to give
that kind of feedback to your boss. Briefly explain two things that he did very well from a usercentred design perspective and two things that he did very poorly. [4 pts]
NOTE: there are many possibilities, here are the ones we found most compelling.
Good job, boss:
You prototyped a variety of approaches to explore their strengths and weaknesses.
You tested your systems under realistic circumstances.

But maybe we shouldn’t have…
…focused your design efforts on the available technology rather than the problems, needs, and
practices of users.
…settled so quickly based only on your own input (and not a broad range of representative users)
on a particular design.

(continued on next page)

CPSC 344 2007/08 W1

8 of 14

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Initials: _________________
(b) Now that your boss is convinced of the need for more early stage user-centred design work, list two
useful and experimentally valid activities which you, as a trained HCI designer, could do to learn
more to about how this product should work (or even if it’s a good idea). In each case, describe the
goal of the activity, the subject group’s makeup, how you’d contact them and what/how you’d ask
them. [5 pts each]
Example response: To explore typical enthusiastic cyclists’ willingness to add an extra device to the
set of devices they already use on rides, team up with the local bike club to solicit a series of focus
group sessions (divided into commuters, hobbyists, and racers). Contact the users by the most
standard mass distribution means the bike club uses, e.g., an e-mail newsletter if they have one.
Questions might centre on the equipment that riders currently own and use and their fears, tolerance,
and demand for new devices, but the focus group facilitator would allow discussion to roam freely as
long as the topic continued to be ride “accessories”.
NOTE: there are many possibilities, here are two interesting ones based on student responses.
(1) To assess the potential benefit of the device among "influential" potential users (those who will
help other end users make their purchase decisions, particularly tour leaders and bike store
owners/operators), in terms of the number and importance of ideas that occur to them on rides, we
will equip subjects with a clicker device they can use to record each time they have an idea during a
ride that they would "regret not remembering later". We will recruit influential users using an
exhaustive list of tour leaders/cycle shops in the city (or a tighter region if funding is too tight) and
contacting each one via telephone. We will send the clicker device to the subject to use on a training
or pleasure ride along with diarying/submission instructions (to get info on type, length, and
environment of the ride they made and basic demographics). We will compensate participants in
cash.

(2) To explore the broader market for the device beyond cyclists, we will conduct a broad-ranging
survey of "mobile thinkers": anyone who might have (and lose!) ideas in situations where it's difficult
to record them. Questions will focus on whether individuals "lose" ideas that seem important to them
because of inadequate recording (we will need to include examples to help them understand the
concept) and what their environment/context is during this process. Because this is an exploratory
process, we're looking less for complete representativeness within groups and more for a broad range
of groups; so, we will try to canvass a variety of interest groups through venues like university clubs
or professional organizations. We will send a limited set of questionnaires to each organization's
representatives with monetary compensation tied to completion of as many of the surveys as possible
by different organization members, up to the limit provided.

CPSC 344 2007/08 W1

9 of 14

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Question #5 [6 points total]: Stakeholders
List what you consider to be the 3 most important stakeholders, given the constraints and resources from
the design brief. (Many relevant stakeholders exist!) Be specific in your answer: e.g. if describing an
end-user stakeholder, clearly identify demographic characteristics.
For each stakeholder, say in 1 sentence what makes this role important. You do not need to identify
their potential needs and concerns. [2 pts each]
Example: Enthusiastic but non-professional cyclists (i.e., amateurs who join bike clubs and ride
groups), who constitute the largest pool of likely purchasers for the product.
NOTE: there are many possibilities although there are also many responses that are clearly not among the
three most important. Here are three plausible “most important” stakeholders. Yes, we stole (1) from
Question #4… that’s a great way to save time and effort on the exam!
(1) Cyclists in positions of direct, face-to-face influence such as tour leaders and bike store
owners/operators will help many (and perhaps most) other end users make their purchase decisions.

(2) The CEO had the initial idea and impetus for this project and has shown a clear, personal interest
in it. Thus, he seems likely to at least have an effective “veto” over the design.

(3) The members of the local bike club will likely play a central role in the evaluation process as
available, friendly users. Thus, we will probably want to keep them engaged in and informed about
the design process from the start both for the value of their feedback and to maintain goodwill so we
can rely on their help in various formal evaluations.

CPSC 344 2007/08 W1

10 of 14

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Initials: _________________

Question #6 [8 points total]: Threats to Validity
Following pre-design evaluation, the UI group builds a functional prototype of a proposed UI. The
prototype is tethered, requiring power and data connections to a computer that runs the system back-end.
The interface for downloading, viewing, and organizing ride notes has not yet been prototyped.
You set up a testing lab in a wind-tunnel. A bicycle frame — minus the wheels but with freely spinning
pedals — is bolted to the centre of the tunnel. Before an experiment, the subject receives a list of topics
to think about and has the frame adjusted to their own normal riding configuration. They then put on the
prototype, mount the frame, and begin pedaling. A “natural cycling sound-track” recorded from a ride in
the area plays as background. They pedal for 20 minutes, recording ideas they have on the chosen topics.
Through use of the lab setup and an off-site retroactive interview, you plan to learn whether potential
users feel comfortable with the physical prototype while in riding position, and how much use (in
“muses” per unit time) the device receives.
Your recruiters solicit randomly selected passing riders as participants at a stop sign along a well-used
commuter bike path. You offer modest compensation in exchange for taking part in the two-session
experiment. You end up with 25 participants from a range of backgrounds.
This example, if the sole source of user input at this stage, violates multiple kinds of experiment validity
as discussed in 344. For each of the validity types listed below, describe a way in which it is violated
and a way in which it is respected.
[4 pts each]
NOTE: there are many possibilities. Here are a few plausible ones.
(a) External OR face validity.
VIOLATED:
External: this setup generalizes poorly to real potential users’ rides. For most rides, musing
would instead be secondary to the ride’s primary goal (commuting or even pleasure).

RESPECTED:
External/face: the key factor of realistic ambient noise, which may lead to “muses” or interfere
with recording, is replicated reasonably faithfully, which strengthens the generalizability of
claims from the experiment to the noisy environments real cyclists face.

(b) Construct validity:
VIOLATED:
When we supply a list of topics to think about, we end up measuring muses on our provided
threads rather than the rider’s “intrinsic” muses per unit time.

RESPECTED:
The lab setup seems well-designed to actually measure riders’ comfort in cycling position since
care is taken to ensure that cyclists conform to a reasonable riding position.

CPSC 344 2007/08 W1

11 of 14

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Question #7 [7 points total]: Matching Exercise
The terms listed immediately below are possible answers for the definitions listed lower on the page. Use
the number corresponding to a term in the first list as an answer in the space provided next to the
following questions if you think it is the best match for that concept or definition. Each term in the first
list is used either once or not at all.
(1) Affinity diagram

(10) Likert scale responses on a questionnaire

(2) Camera

(11) Sensory buffers

(3) System image

(12) Videotaped, semi-structured interview

(4) Modular input processing

(13) Cognitive Walkthrough

(5) Negative transfer

(14) Cultural idiom

(6) Stimulus/response compatibility

(15) Exploratory vs. confirmatory research

(7) Recognition vs. recall

(16) Keyboard logs

(8) Norman’s “Gulfs”

(17) Affordance

(9) Task examples

(18) Perceptual fusion

For each statement below, write the number of the term from the list above that best fits into the missing
space. [1 pt each]
3

(a) What the users sees of an interface

10

(b) Numeric ratings of agreement/disagreement

1

(c) A way to turn unprocessed qualitative data into coherent arguments

2

(d) A poor model of how human vision works

8

(e) An overall metaphor for what makes understanding an interface challenging for users

13

(f) A “discount” usability method

15

(g) One way of comparing qualitative and quantitative methods

CPSC 344 2007/08 W1

12 of 14

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

ame:

Student ID umber:

Extra page to continue work.

CPSC 344 2005-06 T1

13 of 14

Midterm Exam (50 minutes)

Extra page to continue work.

CPSC 344 2007/08 W1

14 of 14

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

