https://web.archive.org/web/2222/http://www.ugrad.cs.ubc.ca/~cs344/current-term/res/oldexams/cpsc344-2008w1-midterm-sample-soln.pdf
Author: Karon MacLean
Name:

Student ID Number:

Signature:

CPSC 344 2008W1 Midterm Exam
90 minutes
SOLUTIONS + comments
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
K. MacLean
Exam Instructions (read carefully):
1. Sign this page in the space provided to indicate your
agreement with these instructions. (You must sign to
write the exam.)
2. Continue reading these instructions, but do not open
the exam booklet until you are told to do so by a
proctor.
3. Print your Name and Student ID at the top of each
page of the exam before you start working.
4. Cheating is an academic offense. Your signature on
the exam indicates that you understand and agree to
the University’s policies regarding cheating on
exams.
5. The exam is closed book. There are no aids
permitted (this includes calculators).
6. Interpret the exam questions as written. When in
doubt, take a strict, literal interpretation of the
question.
7. You have 90 minutes in which to work (~1
min/mark). Budget your time wisely.

Question

Points

1

12

2

12

3

12

4

16

5

8

6

22

Total

82

Received

10 pts on
distributed exam

80 pts on
distributed exam

8. No one will be permitted to leave the exam room
during the last ten minutes of the exam.

CPSC 344 2008-09 T1

1 of 16

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

Question #1 [12 points total]: True/False
For each of the 6 statements below, indicate whether the statement is true or false by circling either True
or False. Briefly explain your T/F response in one or two sentences, and illustrate with an example where
appropriate. [2 pts each; 1 pt for T/F + 1 pt for explanation] explanation: full credit only for very good
ones
(a) Statement: In HCI, we refer to “human error” as a “myth” because in fact, people never make
mistakes.
True

False

Explain:
False. People do make mistakes - all the time. The question is WHY – it’s often because the interface was
not designed with their abilities and context in mind, and a better design could have avoided them. In
extreme cases, the interface requires humans to do something that’s physically impossible for them.
Calling it “human error” lays responsibility entirely on the user, when this may be unrealistic.

(b) Statement: Contrary to how it may seem, the mental visual image we hold of a scene is constructed
gradually, with attention determining what goes into the image.
True

False

Explain:
True. The “parallel” camera metaphor is an inaccurate, even though it seems right. Our focal point is
always moving, update is selective and guided by attention. This is how we can visually miss so much.
(must reference “how it seems” in explanation).

(c) Statement: The secretary who processes all the expense reports filed by faculty and students in a
department is an object of the task of expense report processing in that department.
True

False

Explain:
True. While we don’t like to refer to people as objects, in this case the secretary is a resource or “task
object” because the task depends on her special skills, job description and/or access privileges

CPSC 344 2008-09 T1

2 of 16

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

(d) Statement: Statement: The gulfs of execution and evaluation (Norman) are part of a model that is
useful for understanding (in particular) expert, rather than novice, interface use.
True

False

Explain:
False. Norman’s model of Goal-Oriented Action is focused on exploratory use; it is not going to be that
applicable to expert use. 0 pts for explanation of “Applies to all users” (implication: equally applicable
to all).

(e) Statement: As designers, we use evaluation tools aimed at understanding a user’s mental model of an
interaction, so we can then modify the user’s mental model when we see it is incorrect.
True

False

Explain:
False. Designers can influence user’s mental models only indirectly; we only have direct control over the
system image.

(f) Statement: One way a designer can build the affordances of an interaction is by using constraints.
True

False

Explain:
True. Visible constraints are a way of revealing affordances, because they highlight the “negative”
space of what is not possible; or said another way, they indicate (helpfully) limits on what is possible. Of
course, this is true only if the constraints are perceivable to the user as he/she assesses the interface and
forms action goals. 0 pts for just giving an example; an explanation was also required.

CPSC 344 2008-09 T1

3 of 16

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

Question #2 [12 points total]: Design Concepts
A 5-year-old child (indicated by the cartoon
figure in the figure) encounters the structure
shown in the photograph on left side of figure,
in the middle of a park. He has not seen
anything like it before.
(You can ignore the bubble gum in the child’s
hair, and just focus on the confused expression
on his face ).
The structure’s height relative to the child’s
size is as indicated in the figure. No other
children are around.
Four design concepts are listed below. For
each, describe how one aspect of the structure
or situation which is referenced by this
concept could influence, or conversely fail to
influence this child as he decides whether,
why and how to interact with the structure.
[up to 3 pts per concept]
(a) Affordance:
FOR ALL ANSWERS: full credit only for excellent answers.
(a): Many possible good answers; it was easier to provide an excellent answer by offering multiple
examples. E.g.
• bars at the arm/shoulder height are about the right height for pulling up and holding onto
• the platform at knee height suggests climbing onto (sitting: just 1 pt. legs would drag!)
• roundness (might) suggest spinning
• However, the bars don’t have handholds, so the grasping part might be unclear
(b) Feedback:
When he climbs onto it, it moves easily. Leaning in and out makes it spin faster and slower. If these
movements are enjoyable, this helps him learn how to play with it, without having to be shown or told.
For full marks, needed to include how the user utilized the feedback (e.g. enjoyable motion -> play more)
(c) Transfer:
Since he hasn’t seen this before, there might not be transfer; also, he doesn’t get to watch what other
children do with it. (Answers which suggest he has seen spinning things in other domains work).
An answer of “no transfer occurred” needed to be backed up with rationale such as above.
(d) Individual differences:
The structure is oriented towards his height. If it were smaller and taller relative to his size, the same
actions might not be clear to him. For full marks, needed to provide some elaboration.
CPSC 344 2008-09 T1

4 of 16

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

Question #3 [12 points total]: Mental Models
Contrast structural versus functional mental models:
(a) Explain the difference between structural and functional mental models [2 pts]:
A structural model presents an image of WHAT the system is; a functional (action-based) model describes
HOW it is used.
For each model, 1 point if the given definition matches the meaning of the sample solution (what the
system is; how its components are laid out and are interrelated; etc.)
• structural: not sufficient to only say "how the system works", as this leaves certain structural aspects
unclear (-1/2)
• structural: not sufficient to only say "what the system looks like", as this is a superficial "map"
definition (-1/2)
• structural: incorrect (0) if it is implied that the model describes use (this is a functional model)
• functional: must describe that it is action-based, provides a step-by-step flow, etc. for full marks
• -1/2 in all cases for erroneous extraneous information
(b) State one good and one bad aspect of EACH [2 pt each]:
Structural:

Functional:
Structural: For example,
- User may need additional knowledge to use
- may be harder to use generally.
+ often more powerful or flexible (more global knowledge
Functional: For example,
+ easier to use, does not assume global/system knowledge
- not helpful for problem-solving or dealing with unexpected
Each advantage/disadvantage marked out of 1. Full marks for clear identification.
•

complete reversal of advantages/disadvantages between structural and functional are acceptable if
they are explained (i.e., "harder vs. easier" requires clarification)

•

1/2 marks for vague answers that are not given in the context of the models (the question asks for a
good and bad aspect of each)

CPSC 344 2008-09 T1

5 of 16

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

(c) Give one example of EACH. Minimal points for repeating examples given in class [3 pts each]:
Structural:

Functional:
Examples given in class are listed here. To get full marks, example must be spot-on and clearly
explained. Max 1 point per example if repeat class examples.
Structural: road map (shows a particular type of information, but isn’t customized to your particular use
of the information. You can use it in many ways; it gives you a global view of the information.
Functional: Google directions (step-by-step): great when everything’s there; need more when there’s a
roadblock. If something goes wrong or you change your plan, they do not help your error recovery.
[Many kinds of step-by-step manuals or ‘wizards’ would be acceptable answer here.]
Full marks if a clear example is given with a correct explanation of what makes it structural/functional
•

1/3 given for repetitions from lecture (maps, directions)

•

structural: 1/3 for identifying the "overview" aspect of the example (e.g., layout of things in my
kitchen); explanation about how this guides/drives the model required for 3 points

•

functional: full marks for accurate examples if they mention guidance, step-by-step progress, and
roadblocks to troubleshooting or some other clear reason that the example is functional (or if they
mention this in an answer to a different part of the question)

•

-1 in all cases for erroneous extraneous information

CPSC 344 2008-09 T1

6 of 16

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

Question #4 [16 points total]: Discussion Questions
(a) Subjective evaluation [5 pts total]:
Give one example of a subjective evaluation metric [1 pt]:
Answer must be subjective (half) and metric (half). Half marks for orderable, multi-choice questions.
Likert scale is ideal (e.g. “From 1-5, how much did you like Interface A?”), as it’s metric(-like) and often
asks for subjective information (users’ opinions, feelings, etc.)
Explain what makes it subjective [2 pts]:
The data relies on personal experience, opinions, or attitudes, and it cannot be observed objectively. The
data is self-reported.
Describe a situation in which this type of data would be particularly valuable [2 pts]:
Subjective data (one and a half) is valuable when you seek information about attitudes, interpretation of
behavior you’ve observed, and when objective data cannot be obtained. A metric (half) would be useful
for easily compiling and comparing the data (as it exists along a common scale/categories). Subjective
data can be quantitative or qualitative.

(b) Quantitative evaluation [5 pts total]:
Give one example of a quantitative evaluation technique [1 pt]:
Any technique in which data is captured in a numerical form; rated, ordered, measured (e.g.
performance speed, # of errors). Allowed Likert, though they’re a little tricky.
Explain what makes it quantitative [2 pts]:
It is quantitative because data can be described on a numerical scale; it’s more easily compared or
compiled.
Describe a situation in which this type of technique would be particularly valuable [2 pts]:
Quantitative data is valuable for comparing data from different situations (e.g. how do you know one
system is better than another), compiling data, and for analysis and summary statistics. Again,
quantitative data can be subjective or objective.

CPSC 344 2008-09 T1

7 of 16

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

(c) Describe cognitive walkthrough by describing its following aspects: [6 pts total]
Consists of [2 pts]:
Goals [2 pts]:
When in the design process it is most useful [2 pts]:
Consists of: description/prototype of interface, task examples and actions necessary to complete them,
users or experimenters that try to perform tasks using the interface, and questions to ask at each step
(see http://www.pages.drexel.edu/~zwz22/CognWalk.htm)
Goals: to understand if and how users learn to accomplish tasks with the interface (i.e. the degree to
which the prototype establishes a helpful mental model in the user), and any problems that may come up
while learning.
When: It is most useful in early design (even with a description of the interface, or partial prototype), to
establish the large parameters of the design.

CPSC 344 2008-09 T1

8 of 16

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

Questions 5-6 are based on the following design brief.
Your design team has been retained by a university researcher (for a fee) to design the interface for a new
web-based recruitment and reservation system for psychology experiments (known by the internal name
“SubjectSignupNow”). This system will be used by university graduate students and staff running user
experiments, the staff managing the experiment rooms and equipment, and the subjects (mainly students)
who participate in these experiments.
In the past, experimenters have used email and posters to recruit and sign up subjects, who are
compensated with a monetary payment, course credit, or the satisfaction of a job well done. However,
these methods are not good for developing and accessing a subject pool. Furthermore, subjects and
experimenters alike find it cumbersome to use. For whatever reason, not very many subjects have been
signing up lately.
Your client (the researcher), having noticed how much students these days use cell phones, has told you
it’s very important that students be able to view available experiment opportunities and sign up for them
using a mobile networked device (i.e. mobile phone with internet access).
Your team is right at the start of the design process for SubjectSignupNow. And while you are excited
about the project, you are also concerned that your client might not completely understand either the
source of the problems observed with current method, or the implications of the suggested new approach.

CPSC 344 2008-09 T1

9 of 16

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

Question #5 [8 points total]: Stakeholders
(a) List 4 important stakeholders, given the information provided in the design brief. Be specific in your
answer: e.g. clearly identify demographic characteristics when relevant.
Then, justify them: for each stakeholder you list, state in 1 sentence what makes this role
important. You do not need to identify their potential needs and concerns beyond this justification.
[1.5 pts each; up to 2 additional pts total for exceptional insight]
Example (probably not the most important one!): “Significant others” of potential subjects: may
want to know if an experiment is really the reason for a cancelled date.
1.

2.

3.

4.

.5 pt for stakeholder; 1 pt for justification. Reasonable answers accepted. E.g.:
- the students (potential subjects); the researcher, both as employer and as user of the utility; the
experimenters (grad students and staff); the facility managers; the granting agency; the university ethics
board, who may be concerned about the recruiting procedure followed; instructors giving course credit.
Keep points low. Most of the stakeholders are identified in design brief. Emphasis on good justification.
+1 (extra) for mentioning ethics.

CPSC 344 2008-09 T1

10 of 16

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

Question #6 [22 points total]: Pre-Design Activities
(a) In 1-2 sentences, explain why it is wise to use more than one such activity to understand what is
involved in the process that this new interface will support [3 pts]:
No one activity will accommodate all your pre-design evaluation needs, because all evaluation activities
suffer from some flaw or limitation; instead you must use a variety of approaches to look at a question
from different perspectives.
NOTE: this is called “triangulation” but we didn’t dwell on that term in 2008 – term not required.
Was looking (in particular) for “complementing of strengths and weaknesses”. Each evaluation method
has different strengths and weakness, which results in faulty (patchy or erroneous) data if you use just
one type. By using different methods, your view becomes more robust.
Another good reason, more commonly mentioned, is to access different user groups, address different
questions, etc. in that different methods might be more suited to different groups (e.g. researchers vs
potential subjects. “Get more data that way” was not, by itself, a good answer. Obviously, you can get
large amounts of data with a single method if you use it enough.

(b) What are the most immediately appropriate activities that you, as a trained HCI designer, could do in
this stage to learn how this interface should work (or even if it’s a good idea)? You will want to
address the concerns noted in the design brief, both those of the client and those of the design team.
In each case, state (1) the specific goal of the activity (including how it addresses a noted concern),
(2) the type of activity, (3) the makeup of the group you’d access, (4) how you’d contact them, (5)
most important things you’d ask/show them; and (6) potential problems with this approach that
you must be aware of and try to address.
Ensure that the various parts of your answer are clear (name/ number them as in example).
[8 pts per activity and description; up to 3 pts more, total, for highly insightful responses]

Example response (if you use this activity or goal, other parts of your answer should be quite different):
Activity X:
1. Goal: To understand what is keeping students from signing up with the present system.
2. Type: Anonymous web survey.
3. Makeup: Members of a psychology course which gives extra credit for experiment participation.
4. Contact: by email (list shared by the course instructor, on condition of appropriate use).
5. Questions: history of performing evaluations; awareness of posted experiments; reasons for not
signing up; difficulty of learning of experiments/signing up; would proposed web-based system, cell
phone access help; any other suggestions?
CPSC 344 2008-09 T1

11 of 16

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

Name:

Student ID Number:

6. Potential problems: Addressees need incentive to respond to survey; potential inaccuracy or bias
in self-reporting; if students have not yet tried to sign up, might not learn much from them; accessing
only one type of potential subjects (those who would be compensated with course credit.)
To get full base credit, must have basically appropriate answers at the detail level of example: 1 pt each
for 1-4, 2 pt each for 5-6. To get add’l 3 pts, must have exceptional choices, rationale, insight into issues;
and in particular, nice coverage across all methods (the example provided plus your two) was rewarded
here.
More observations, accumulated during marking:
•

Choosing your evaluation goals: Strategize! You are looking for high value. What are the MOST
IMPORTANT things you need to learn? In early design, don’t focus on details. Activities should
complement one another so together they cover your most important need-to-know items. So, e.g.
seeking details of how people respond to text messages (in general) is of low relevance. Text
solicitation for experiments wasn’t even mentioned (we spoke of sign-ups) and while it is one possible
approach, you first need to know why people aren’t signing up now.

•

Choosing your sample: your subjects need to be people who have the information you need. For
example, why would you ask a general sample of all university students why they don’t sign up? (A
common answer). Most of these students probably have never heard of the system.

•

Sampling your demographic: there are other drawbacks to having large samples (e.g. “whole
university”). For example, if you are solicited to participate in a survey and you are aware that you
are just one of thousands, you may be less likely to participate because your input does not feel
important. When you are aware you are part of a more selective sample, and you are persuaded that
your input is particularly valuable in some way, this helps.

•

Contacting your sample: just saying “email” no good. How will you get those email /phone
addresses? If everyone did what you’re proposing to do, this would be a huge source of spam,
reducing its value/impact. There were a LOT of responses that said “we’ll use the emergency contact
registry” or “contact through student services”. What makes you think you have access to these lists?
Do you get other communications through them? What would it do to the emergency contact service
if it got clogged with spam? Indiscriminate bombardment is what telemarketers do.

•

Anonymity: there are cases where respondents don’t need to be anonymous. For example, when they
are the clients … More complex case is when the information they yield is useless if you can’t follow
up on it. In this case, taking great pains to anonymize researcher respondents is probably misplaced
effort, unless you imagine their responses might reflect badly upon them to their boss.

•

Incentives: are a double-edged sword. If you offer an incentive that has potential of offending, this
reduce recruitment. (e.g. Starbucks card: some people have principled objections to this business,
and an assumption that “everyone loves Starbucks” is an example of experimenter bias.)

•

Asking questions about the “new” system in pre-design: You don’t even have requirements yet –
that will presumably come out of pre-design evaluations; you certainly don’t have much information
about the new system. Asking users, either researchers or potential subjects, what they think about
the new system is not likely to yield valuable data. What are they supposed to base their responses
on?

CPSC 344 2008-09 T1

12 of 16

Midterm Exam (90 minutes)

