https://www.ugrad.cs.ubc.ca/~q7w9a/exams.cgi/exams.cgi/home/c/cs426/public_html/426-fall-2004/cs426_finalproject.pdf
CPSC 426

Assignment

Final Project: 25%

Due

December 3, 2004

For your final project, you are expected to work in pairs. Larger groups are acceptable, but will need to achieve more to show
that everyone on the team made a good contribution. Solo projects are also acceptable, but you will be expected to do the same
amount of work as a pair, so it may be twice as hard.
The purpose of the final project is to demonstrate that you can independently learn about, understand, and implement advanced
animation methods that have not been covered in the assignments. You must implement a method related to character animation (e.g. doing stuff with motion capture data, simulating Lagrangian dynamics, character skinning, flocking behaviour,
inverse kinematics, etc.), and also a method related to passive animation (e.g. rigid body motion, other types of particle systems, deformable objects, water waves, etc.). Note that these lists aren’t necessarily exclusive: for example, you can argue
that character skinning should count as passive animation, or that a deformable object whose deformation parameters you can
control with motion curves is more like character animation.
In addition to your notes from lectures, you may want to get ideas by looking through the course textbook, or through previous
SIGGRAPH papers (you can browse online at the ACM Digital Library), or by coming to talk to me.
Teams with more than two people will need to implement more methods, or argue that the methods they have chosen are hard
enough that it counts for more.
The showcase for what you choose to implement will either be a short film (think on the order of 10 seconds) or an interactive
program (perhaps a game, but other possibilities exist—e.g. an interactive poser that does inverse kinematics and shows the
results with skinning).
You are allowed and even encouraged to use external libraries or code I’ve provided in the class, etc. but you must give credit
for what you have used. Obviously, if an external library implements an animation method for you, you may not count that as
one of your methods.

1

Proposal

The first thing you need to do is figure out who is on your team. The second thing you need to do is figure out what you want
to do, and make a proposal to me about it. By 4pm, Friday, November 12, you must finalize who is in your team, and you
must have secured my approval for your project. You will lose marks for establishing this later.
Note: your first proposal may not be acceptable. I may have to talk to you about modifying it to something more in line with
the course, or something less ambitious. Do NOT leave this to the last day, as it could take some revisions to make this
work.

2

Deliverables

By midnight of December 3 you need to send the code you developed for the final project to the course account.
You have two options for grading: either doing a short demo or doing a write-up. If your interactive program doesn’t compile
and run on the Linux machines in CICSR or on a Mac OS X box, or your short film doesn’t play on my Mac (e.g. uses some
proprietary Microsoft codec), then you will have to do the demo, and you are responsible for providing a machine on which
you will do the demo (in CICSR building or nearby).
For the demo: you need to set up an appointment with me (10 minutes should be sufficient) at some time to demonstrate your
work. The appointment may be slightly after December 3 if scheduling it before then will not work. In the appointment you
will run your program or show your movie, and explain what you did and how you did it.
If you don’t do a demo: you need to email the course account with either a URL to the movie you made or with clear instructions
on how to compile and run the interactive program you made. You also must submit a write-up, either in email or on paper,
explaining what you did and how you did it.

1

